Adds metrics framework documentation (#6393)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _monitoring-your-cluster/metrics/getting-started.md

---
layout: default
title: Metrics Framework 
parent: Trace Analytics
nav_order: 65
redirect_from:
  - /monitoring-your-cluster/metrics/
---

> This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/10141).    

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/10141).    
```

{: .warning}

> The current OpenSearch stats APIs offer valuable insights into the inner workings of each node and the cluster as a whole. However, they lack certain details such as percentiles and do not provide the semantics of richer metric types like histograms. Consequently, identifying outliers becomes challenging. OpenSearch with Metrics Framework feature adds comprehensive metric support to effectively monitor the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whilte the OpenSearch Stats APIs offer insights into the inner workings of each node and an OpenSearch cluster as a whole, the statistics lack certain details, such as percentiles, and do not provide the semantics of richer metric types like histograms. Consequently, identifying outliers within cluster statistic becomes challenging when using only the Stats API. 

The OpenSearch Metric Framework plugin adds comprehensive metric support to effectively monitor an OpenSearch cluster. Using the Metrics Framework APIs, plugin and extension developers can add new monitoring metrics. In addition, the OpenSearch distribution bundles the `telemetry-otel` plugin which provides the implementation for metrics instrumentation based on the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Java SDK.
```

> Developers can easily add new metrics using the Metrics Framework and some of them are already added to visualize the query shaping, see the associated PR [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/10724). OpenTelemetry offers decent support for metrics, and we are leveraging the existing `telemetry-otel` plugin to provide the implementation for metrics as well. OpenSearch users can easily consume these metrics through open source OpenTelemetry sinks.

Reviewer 2: I think we don't need to mention other issues / pull requests here, that would be separate features

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugin and extension developers should be able to easily add new metrics using the Metrics Framework APIs. By default, the OpenSearch distribution bundles `telemetry-otel` plugin that provide the implementation for metrics instrumentation based on [OpenTelemetry](opentelemetry.io) Java SDK.
```

Reviewer: @reta: I combined this feedback with my suggestion above.

> ## Get started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started
```

> The Metrics Framework feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.11. To begin using the metrics framework feature, you need to first enable the `telemetry feature` using the `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag and subsequently using the metrics framework feature flag. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature because it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring metrics framework is described in the following sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Metrics Framework feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.11. To begin using the metrics framework feature, you need to first enable the `telemetry feature` using the `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag and subsequently using the metrics framework feature flag. 

Enabling this feature can consume system resources. Before enabling the Metrics Framework, consider if you have enough cluster resources to allocate.
{: .warning}
```

### Enabling the flag on a node using tarball

> The enable flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `enable` flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.
```

#### Option 1: Enable the experimental feature flag in the `opensearch.yml` file

1. Change to the top directory of your OpenSearch installation:

```bash
cd \path\to\opensearch
```

2. Open your OpenSearch configuration folder, and then open the `opensearch.yml` file with a text editor.
3. Add the following line:

```bash
opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```
{% include copy.html %}

4. Save your changes and close the file.

#### Option 2: Modify jvm.options

Add the following lines to `config/jvm.options` before starting the OpenSearch process to enable the feature and its dependency:

```bash
-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```
{% include copy.html %}

Run OpenSearch:

```bash
./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

#### Option 3: Enable from an environment variable

> As an alternative to directly modifying `config/jvm.options`, you can define the properties by using an environment variable. You can enable this feature in a single command when you start OpenSearch or by setting an environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable the Metrics Framework feature in a single command when you start OpenSearch or by setting an environment variable.
```

To add these flags inline when starting OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true" ./opensearch-2.9.0/bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

To define the environment variable separately, prior to running OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
export OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
 ./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

### Enable with Docker containers

If you’re running Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` under `environment`:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```
{% include copy.html %}

> ### Enable for OpenSearch development

Reviewer 2: Do we need this section for user facing documentation?

> ### Enable for OpenSearch development

Reviewer: I wouldn't recommend it, instead, I would keep this in the GitHub repo with the Metrics Framework source code.

To enable the metrics feature, you must first add the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about how to use Gradle to build OpenSearch.

Add the following properties to `run.gradle` to enable the feature:

```json
testClusters {
  runTask {
    testDistribution = 'archive'
 if (numZones > 1) numberOfZones = numZones
    if (numNodes > 1) numberOfNodes = numNodes
    systemProperty 'opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled', 'true'
    }
 }
 ```
 {% include copy.html %}

 ### Enable metrics framework

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the metrics framework (which is disabled by default) by using the following setting that enables metrics in the opensearch.yaml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the metrics framework (which is disabled by default) by adding the following setting to `opensearch.yaml`:
```

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the metrics framework (which is disabled by default) by using the following setting that enables metrics in the opensearch.yaml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the Metrics Framework by using the following setting that enables metrics in the opensearch.yaml:
```

```bash
telemetry.feature.metrics.enabled=true
```

> The OpenSearch metrics framework aims to support various telemetry solutions through plugins. The OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin `telemetry-otel` is available and must be installed to enable metrics. The following guide provides you with the installation instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch Metrics Frame supports various telemetry solutions through plugins. Use the following instructions to enable the `telemetry-otel` plugin:

> ### Exporters

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> 1. **Publish Interval:** Metrics framework can locally aggregate the metrics for the unique dimensions for the configured publish interval and then export. By default this is configured for 1 minute but can be changed using this cluster setting `telemetry.otel.metrics.publish.interval`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Publish Interval:** The Metrics Framework can locally aggregate the metrics with unique dimensions about the configured publish interval, and then export those metrics. By default, the interval is 1 minute. However, you be change the interval using the `telemetry.otel.metrics.publish.interval` cluster setting.
```

> 2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters, and OpenSearch supports the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters. OpenSearch supports the following exporters:
```

---
layout: default
title: Metrics framework 
parent: Trace Analytics
nav_order: 65
redirect_from:
  - /monitoring-your-cluster/metrics/
---

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/10141).    
{: .warning}

> While the OpenSearch Stats APIs offer insights into the inner workings of each node and an OpenSearch cluster as a whole, the statistics lack certain details, such as percentiles, and do not provide the semantics of richer metric types like histograms. Consequently, identifying outliers within cluster statistic becomes challenging when using only the Stats API. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the OpenSearch Stats APIs offer insight into the inner workings of each node and an OpenSearch cluster as a whole, the statistics lack certain details, such as percentiles, and do not provide the semantics of richer metric types, like histograms. Consequently, identifying outliers within cluster statistics becomes challenging when using only the Stats API. 
```

> The metrics framework feature adds comprehensive metric support to effectively monitor an OpenSearch cluster. Using the Metrics Framework APIs, plugin and extension developers can add new monitoring metrics. In addition, the OpenSearch distribution bundles the `telemetry-otel` plugin which provides the implementation for metrics instrumentation based on the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Java SDK.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The metrics framework feature adds comprehensive metrics support to effectively monitor an OpenSearch cluster. Using the Metrics Framework APIs, plugin, and extension, developers can add new monitoring metrics. In addition, the OpenSearch distribution bundles the `telemetry-otel` plugin, which provides the implementation for metrics instrumentation based on the [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io) Java SDK.
```

## Getting started

> The Metrics Framework feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.11. To begin using the metrics framework feature, you need to first enable the `telemetry feature` using the `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag and subsequently using the metrics framework feature flag. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The metrics framework feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.11. To begin using the metrics framework feature, you need to first enable the `telemetry feature` by using the `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag and subsequently by using the metrics framework feature flag. 
```

> Enabling this feature can consume system resources. Before enabling the metrics framework, consider if you have enough cluster resources to allocate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enabling this feature can consume system resources. Before enabling the metrics framework feature, determine whether you have sufficient cluster resources to allocate.
```

{: .warning}

### Enabling the feature flag on a node using tarball

> The `enable` flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

Reviewer 3: Will "new" quickly become outdated? If so, I would remove.

> The `enable` flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `enable` flag is toggled using a Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.
```

#### Option 1: Enable the experimental feature flag in the `opensearch.yml` file

1. Navigate to your OpenSearch directory using the following command:

  ```bash
  cd \path\to\opensearch
  ```

> 2. Open your the `opensearch.yaml` file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Open your `opensearch.yaml` file.
```

3. Add the following setting to `opensearch.yaml`:

  ```bash
  opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
  ```
  {% include copy.html %}

4. Save your changes and close the file.

#### Option 2: Modify jvm.options

> To enable the metrics framework feature using `jvm`, add the following line to `config/jvm.options` before starting the OpenSearch:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable the metrics framework feature using `jvm`, add the following line to `config/jvm.options` before starting OpenSearch:
```

```bash
-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```
{% include copy.html %}

#### Option 3: Enable from an environment variable

> You can enable the metrics framework in a single command by adding the metrics framework environment variable to the `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` command, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can enable the metrics framework feature with a single command by adding the metrics framework environment variable to the `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` command, as shown in the following example:
```

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true" ./opensearch-2.9.0/bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

You can also define the environment variable separately before running OpenSearch by running the following command:

```bash
export OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
 ./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

> ### Enable with Docker containers

Reviewer 3: "Enable with a Docker container"?

> ### Enable with Docker containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable with Docker 
```

If you’re running OpenSearch using Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` under `environment`:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```
{% include copy.html %}

> ### Enable metrics framework

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Enable the metrics framework feature
```

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the metrics framework by using the following setting that enables metrics in the opensearch.yaml:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the metrics framework feature by using the following setting, which enables metrics in the `opensearch.yaml` file:
```

```bash
telemetry.feature.metrics.enabled=true
```

> The metrics framework supports various telemetry solutions through plugins. Use the following instructions to enable the `telemetry-otel` plugin:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The metrics framework feature supports various telemetry solutions through plugins. Use the following instructions to enable the `telemetry-otel` plugin:
```

> The metrics framework supports various telemetry solutions through plugins. Use the following instructions to enable the `telemetry-otel` plugin:

Reviewer 3: The two items below do not read as "instructions" (we don't tell the reader to do anything).

> 1. **Publish Interval:** The Metrics Framework can locally aggregate the metrics with unique dimensions about the configured publish interval, and then export those metrics. By default, the interval is 1 minute. However, you be change the interval using the `telemetry.otel.metrics.publish.interval` cluster setting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Publish interval:** The metrics framework feature can locally aggregate metrics with unique dimensions about the configured publish interval and then export those metrics. By default, the interval is 1 minute. However, you can change the interval using the `telemetry.otel.metrics.publish.interval` cluster setting.
```

> 1. **Publish Interval:** The Metrics Framework can locally aggregate the metrics with unique dimensions about the configured publish interval, and then export those metrics. By default, the interval is 1 minute. However, you be change the interval using the `telemetry.otel.metrics.publish.interval` cluster setting.

Reviewer 3: "dimensions" reads as the wrong word here. Do we mean "information"?
